And that was a decision which I didn't have to, you
might say, go into a separate discussion with
myself, because I had been involved in it, on the
thing. It was perfectly clear to me that the
development of a graduate education program here
at Woods Hole Oceanographic, particularly in
connection with MIT, the way we had this getting
that started, that that was an extraordinarily
worthwhile thing to do for the, should we say, for
the welfare of the world. No decision. In other
words, you don't make decisions at that point. The
pattern is perfectly clear. And when you begin to
make contact with MIT, what was MIT's reaction?
You've been cooperating with MIT for a series of
years now in terms of teaching.
The responsibility, in a sense, for making those
contacts was not really mine. It had already been
done. The major person up there for getting things
started, of course, was Frank Press, as you know,
is now the science advisor to the president. But I
had also worked
on the ICO days, had worked a little with Jerry
Wiesner, who was the president, the boss of, I'd
also worked briefly with Stratton. So I knew MIT
well enough to know that they're one of the few
universities in which, if you had an objective
that was worthwhile, that MIT could somehow or
other find a way to do it. And I must say, that's a
rather unique university in that sense.
Was your first assignment dean then to begin to
draw departments here at Woods Hole?
K.O. Emery had already done that, too. And this,
really, the technical aspects of moving in as dean
were extraordinarily simple, because so much
state work had been done already. The main
objective was to, you might say, define the
objective as the program. And the objectives of
the program really were that we would regard Woods
Hole as a community of scientists. And the only
difference between graduate students and,
quote, members of the faculty is that they're
beginning scientists, so to speak. So that we
tried to set it up, and had fair success at it, at
avoiding the rather detailed and complicated
curriculum that is so common in most graduate
schools. In other words, part of my objective was
to hold down the organization, you might say, and
to maintain the concept of its being a place for a
young scientist to learn science. Now, as an
outsider,
Woods Hole had not really ever been known much as a
teaching institution. It was primarily a
research institution. Why do you suppose Woods
Hole began to move into graduate studies? No,
that's not true. They... Over the years, we've got
the figures there. There have been a large number
of people doing their doctorate work here at Woods
Hole. But it would be done, someone from Chicago or
from Yale or Harvard or wherever would be coming
down, and we would make provisions for them, and
they could work with one of our staff people. So
that in essence, we had been in the business all
along. We hadn't been in the formal business of
being able to tell a youngster, come down to Woods
Hole and become a part of the scientific community
and select the particular area you want to work in,
and we'll make sure you can get a degree at the end.
Before that, that decision had been made by other
universities, you see. So it was simply a matter of
a shift that we could, in effect, admit the
students and select the students. Rather than
someone deciding with whom he would like to work
and making overtures and this sort
of thing. When time comes for student
recruitment, how do you go about it? Send out the
usual brochures, and the recruitment progress
has been very good. I've forgotten what it is,
about 10 times larger than the ones we can admit.
We set an upper limit, which we've now reached. And
that is that the total number of students
registered in one time should not exceed 80. And
we're sticking very closely to that. And I might
say we reached that level within two years, I
remember.
That's being highly selective. That's being
highly selective. Let's say about a 10 to 1 ratio.
Now, I know that your role as an administrator with
fellow scientists
would probably limit the amount of direction you
could give, since it's sort of a community of
equals. But did you have any series of goals as an
administrator that you should like to carry out
down here? No, except to... Let me put it this way,
that assuming the general goal, of creating the
atmosphere for young scientists to learn science
and the thing. And with sort of the subset on that,
that you try to avoid the excessive organization
so that all students take X, Y, Z courses. And they
have to do it in a certain time and so on. And try to
model the thing so that it fits best both their
backgrounds and their current interests. they
come in from widely different backgrounds.
Biologists, physicists, chemists,
mathematicians, etc., etc.
So that the formalities of the thing, we again
could do very easily because each of the
departments here could set up its own sort of
committee on the thing and could set up, they'd
operate on an admissions committee. We had to have
established joint committees with MIT, which
again turned out to be very easy because MIT has as
many rules as regulations as the ordinary
university does. But they also have a most
remarkable knack of being able to work within
those rules. So essentially, I would say that the
graduate school developed
as a community of scholars. basis, and that it
wouldn't have been possible with any other
combination that I know of, except possibly the
University of Chicago. We could have done it
there. Chicago also has that extraordinary
flexibility, which I might say, having been at
state universities for quite some time, too, it
would be much more difficult than a state
university, simply because of the
organizational sort of rigidity sometimes that
you encounter. No, I had a relatively few
problems. One, there were a terrible number of
small details, and if you want to know why I could
succeed in that, because I know they'd have taken
care of the administrative details and the like,
it was because of Jake Pearson. They finally got
him up to the position of assistant dean. Before
that, he was always assistant to the dean. But Jake
Pearson was remarkable. Let me put it this way. I
came into a situation in which we already had the
enthusiastic support of the important people. By
important, I mean scientifically important at
MIT. We already had enough people at Woods Hole
Oceanographic who would be interested in having
some graduate students around. And we already had
K.O. Emery, who had done quite a bit of six months to
a year, something like that. He'd begun to
formulate the way some of the seminars and courses
might be run on the thing. And we had this
remarkable man, Jake Pearson, could not only
grasp the concepts and assist in developing the
concepts, but he could recognize that if you had a
student at a given point, he had to somehow or other
register properly with MIT. He had to do it here,
too. He had to make sure that the tuition was taken
care of, all those details, so that I had none of
those problems. except to make occasional
decisions if there was a little bit of
misunderstanding, things like that.
Extraordinarily simple job.
Was there any difficulty in encouraging research
scientists, fundamentally research
scientists, to accept teaching duties? Oh, yes.
That would follow. Difficulty in the sense that
if... If we had tried to stipulate to
oceanographer X that you take on a course, we would
have been a hell of a mess. But we had enough people
who would do it and say, well, yes, I'll try it for a
year. And then once they realized the joy of having
some good graduate students paying attention to
them, then they began to offer to do it. But I'm sure
that if we'd tried to follow more of a government
laboratory type of operation where we would have
taken and outlined all the staff members and said,
well, now these guys will teach this course, and
these guys will teach this course, and these guys
will teach this course, I think it would have been a
fiasco. But it was within a couple of years. The
ones who had, some of the people who had originally
said, the hell with it, don't ask me to do a thing
with that. They're on the point where they were at
least taking in students and would say finally,
well, these students want me to give a seminar on
this. And so I'd give a seminar. Well, what's the
difference between a good seminar and a course?
Seminar's better. No, it was extraordinarily
easy here. So the transition then was quite
smooth? Yes. Did the institution grow in terms of
staff with any rapidity once you began to bring in
students? No, I think you'll find from the
statistics that it's been pretty much level as far
as that's concerned. There's been a various
number quite a percentage. I can't give you a
percentage because I've been away for four years.
A fair percentage of our best people now are very
happy to associate with graduate students. And
many of them will also contribute very directly to
teaching.
Were there any accomplishments which you'd like
to single out as dean that you were particularly
proud of?
No, that would be a little hard to define. The
accomplishments
are, of course, ones which depended not so much
upon my operations as a dean as upon the
fulfillment of the objectives that had already
been expressed. In other words, the number of
applicants rose rapidly the first couple of
years, reached a level that we could bring in the
the students so that we would head for this top
level of 80 students maximum on the thing. And
we're giving, I think that amounts to 15 or so
degrees a year. And I would say the existence of the
graduate school on an operating level is the chief
of the objectives. As far as I'm concerned, that's
the accomplishment.
And I'm not being unduly modest when I say that my
role in it was primarily that of just defining a few
of the general ways in which it would operate, and
then relying upon the fact that you had a bunch of
damn bright, able people who would, if you had good
graduate students, would recognize the real
virtue of having young scientists learn their
science. And if you're interested in the history
of science, I think you'll find a beginning
recognition that the advancement of knowledge
really depends in large part upon two roles of
graduate students. One is the work that they do,
and the other is the role they have in changing
their professor. Essays on that are beginning to
appear in public, I might say.
That's one of the things that, well, there's a,
let's go back, there's a little bit of history on
this that had to do with it. I'd also been very
closely associated with Detlef Barak, who was
the, who ended up being the president of
Rockefeller Institute and was responsible for
changing it to Rockefeller University. And his
reasons for doing that and I'd had many long
discussions with him on that, was that many of the
scientists in Rockefeller University were
finding life rather dull, and it was showing up a
little in the work that they were doing. And so that
and I agreed, and I wasn't so advised to him on
anything like that, that this concept that if you
had young scientists develop, for the future,
there are two real positive contributions. One
was the work they did, and the other was the
stimulating effect that they have upon the people
they're working with. So that was in large part the
definition that Ted Bronk had in creating the
university out of the Rockefeller Institute. And
I had that background. And in a sense, you'll see
there's quite a bit of similarity between the two
places. Woods Hole Oceanographic, which was
primarily a research institution, and
Rockefeller Institute, which had been primarily
a research institution. And the same concepts
that led to make that into the university also
applied to the Woods Hole Oceanographic. So I had
more of an educational background in this whole
thing. And we also agreed thoroughly upon this
concept that the community scholar's idea is the
proper way to run a graduate school. To hell with
red tape. If you have a bright student, somehow or
other you make sure he can get his degree. Get him
out. Get him out for the benefit of the public.
Now, when time comes to replace yourself as dean.
Do you go through another search committee? Do you
try to bring somebody in again from outside? Well,
in this particular case, we're
a very favorable position. We had Bob Morris
already here. The answer is no, we didn't have to.
Because if you have someone who's been a notable
scientist, been a dean at a university, and had
been himself assistant secretary of the Navy, and
then had been president of the university. And
here he was sitting there. You don't need to go on a
search committee.
He got the outstanding candidate sitting right
there. Other than that, well, sure, there was the
formality of a search committee. Now, had he been
here, though, when you had first come here, is it?
No. I didn't think so. No, he came in. He's been here
about two years, I think. And,
of course, he followed the work very closely and
we're on good terms. Now,
the next series of questions I have are sort of
personal questions that don't feel off balance.
If you had to list in your scientific career what
you considered your major accomplishment, what
would you list? That would be a toughie. The major
accomplishment, scientifically, really, is
something which has now outgrown me, should we
say, and that is the development of the whole
concept of ion movement. Because at the time when I
was a graduate student, ions didn't move back and
forth across cell membranes except in certain,
like potassium. But the active movement of
sodium, things like that, the development of the
concept of the ability of cell membranes to move
things back and forth, I was very much part of it at
that time. Now then, I also made a decision, as I
say, at about age 55, that that whole field was
going very well indeed. There were some very good
youngsters coming along. They were going to
develop it. And meanwhile, things had been
happening. Following the war, as you know, there
was this development of the concept that there
should be a federal support of science. And I had
also, something I forgot to mention earlier, I had
also been mixed up early in the development of the
Office of Naval Research Operation. I was on, I
think, their first advisory committee in biology
on that. So that when the legislation relating to
the Science Foundation began to get worked up. I
got involved in that, too, because I felt it had to
be done and should involve some of the conceptual
attitudes that the ONR had as well on the thing. And
I got actively involved in some of the legislative
proceedings for a very odd sort of reason. The
first bill that was written head for the National
Science Foundation, a division of medical
sciences with a subdivision of biology. And being
a biologist, of course, that threw me into a big
flat. I had to make certain that any legislation
that went through would recognize that medicine
was really an applied branch of biology.
As one devoted to Pressful, I couldn't stand
seeing this legislation which served the
Division of Medical Sciences and Subdivision of
Biology. Very odd. Which gave rise to some
extraordinarily interesting discussions with
the deans of medical schools. I bet it did.
I need to ask you some questions about ONR. I didn't
realize you were there when it was first
organized. How did the concept of ONR sort of
emerge in terms of supportive science? This is
something which I have tried to get someone to give
me the complete history, and I can't. I can't
answer that. There's something about the
structure of the Navy that allowed them to, once
they established something, and I don't know who
did this, and you put it under an admiral, and you
have a good captain in charge of it, and then he in
turn can go out and get a good civilian to operate
it, you can go ahead and be as innovative as you want
to. And who put in the original ideas, I don't know.
And I wish you would find out. I don't have any idea.
I know Revelle was there, but I don't know where the
idea of ONR came from. I don't either. And...
If I were you, if you ever get into Washington,
look up a man named Chuck Schilling.
I think it's S-C-H. And Chuck Schilling, Bob Abel
knows him well. And Bob might know something about
it. But I really put that something to look into in
the future if you really want to follow the
development of federal support of science. Chuck
Schilling was the captain in charge when I got
involved with LNR. It had been going for, I've
forgotten, several years. There's a moment I
can't remember the date. It was
the late 40s. I became involved. How did you get
involved in UNR?
I'm not quite sure. Most
of these questions you're asking about
involvement, I'm sure you know that the No matter
how much organization you have, things are still
personal associations on that. And I have a
feeling it was because...
I can't give names, but there were a couple of the
Navy people in the old days of... some of the
congressional committees on the formation of the
National Science Foundation, who became
involved also with ONR and the personal
association with them on that.
That's the answer. Well, I think that's the way the
world operates. Oh, yes. The world still operates
on the Cousin Principle, really. But
fortunately, it's not entirely that. In other
words, it's possible to get into the circuit. But
difficult sometimes. Yeah. Difficult if you have
to go through formal application procedures.
It's getting easier, of course.
I'm very pleased that it's possible for him to get a
little outside of the Cousin principle.
Were there any particular accomplishments in,
may I use the word, bureaucratic service? I really
don't mean that at all. I mean in terms of committee
advisory service, of which you're particularly
proud.
Well, the Office of Naval Research had already
devised a system of having an advisory group. And
so at the time that I was in the National Science
Foundation, a very nice character named Alan was
beginning to develop the National Institutes of
Health system on the thing. And we worked up a more
extended philosophy of peer review committees.
And that I was proud of for a while, and now I'm
disappointed in it, because the peer review
committees are more and more getting the idea that
they run the programs. And the original concept we
had, both in the ONR and when I was working with
Allen and the NIH, was that the peer review groups
would be advisory. And the program manager was the
one who really had to make the decisions. on the
basis of the recommendations of the peer review
system. And the reasoning there is very simple,
and that is that if the program goes bad, all you
have to do is fire the program director. Whereas if
he is in a position where you can say that all he's
doing is following the rules of the peer review
group, then how do you fire him, you know? And you
can't fire the peer review committee. So I'm
distressed at the fact that the peer review system
has become so institutionalized and formalized
that they now act as though they are the ones who run
programs. I love the concept of having someone
responsible for a program, not necessarily so you
can fire him, but so that you know who's really
responsible for doing it.
Is there anything you'd like to add to the tape?
No, except to give you the warm approval of what
you're trying to do. And if you're interested in
the history of how oceanography is developed, I
hope you are dragging up the concept that
oceanography really developed, not from not
people who were trained as oceanographers, but
people who were devoted to study the oceans. And,
of course, here at Woods Hole, it was great. You're
doing this in a very good way. But make a note
sometime that if you would be interested in the
discussions that went on, to formulate, well, to
do three things. One is to establish what's so
oceanographic. The other is to convert scripts
from really a biological station into
oceanography. And the third one was to goose up the
University of Washington. There is a collection
of the correspondence and handwritten committee
notes and everything else of Frank Willey. which I
managed to save by a series of accidents, they're
over in the MBL library. And that's something that
if you want to really follow up on the sorts of
discussions that went on by those characters at
that time when they came up with this marvelous
idea and they'd already sold Rockefeller
Foundation to get some money for all these things.
It's well worthwhile, so keep a note on that. If you
ever get out of the, you might say, the Audible
field, and someone wants to really look into the
discussions that went on at that time, this was a
National Academy of Sciences committee, and the
discussions are terrific. And we were very
fortunate in that we have a couple of file drawers
of handwritten, mostly handwritten notes by the
chairman of that committee, Frank Lilley.